INSTALL.md, before:

# hx Install Guide

## Prerequisites

- Go 1.21+
- zsh

## Build

```bash
make build
# Builds with sqlite_fts5 tag for hx find. If FTS5 fails, remove -tags sqlite_fts5 from hx and hxd in Makefile.
```

## Install (optional)

```bash
make install
# Copies bin/hx, bin/hx-emit, bin/hxd to ~/.local/bin
```

Ensure `~/.local/bin` is on your PATH.

## Daemon (hxd)

The daemon ingests spool events into SQLite. Start it manually or via your session manager:

```bash
hxd &
# or: nohup hxd &
```

`hx status` shows daemon health (running / not running) and DB path. `hx dump` prints the last 20 ingested events (no sqlite3 CLI needed).

## Search and sessions

- **hx find \<text\>** — full-text search over command history (FTS5). Returns matching events with session, seq, exit code, cwd.
- **hx last** — last session summary; highlights failures (exit ≠ 0) with 1–2 commands before/after.

## Enable capture (zsh)

Add to `.zshrc`:

```bash
# hx terminal capture
source /path/to/History_eXtended/src/hooks/hx.zsh
```

Or, if you installed via `make install` and the repo is at `~/projects/History_eXtended`:

```bash
source ~/projects/History_eXtended/src/hooks/hx.zsh
```

**Important:** `hx-emit` must be on PATH when the hooks run. If you used `make install`, add `~/.local/bin` to PATH before sourcing the hook (e.g. in `.zshrc`):

```bash
export PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"
source ~/projects/History_eXtended/src/hooks/hx.zsh
```

## Verify

1. Open a new zsh shell (or `source ~/.zshrc`).
2. Run a few commands: `echo hi`, `pwd`, `false`.
3. Check status: `hx status`
4. Inspect spool: `tail ~/.local/share/hx/spool/events.jsonl` or `hx dump` (queries DB, no sqlite3 needed)

You should see `pre` and `post` events for each command.

## Pause / Resume

- `hx pause` — stop capturing (creates `~/.local/share/hx/.paused`)
- `hx resume` — resume capturing

## Data locations

- Spool: `$XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/spool/events.jsonl` (default: `~/.local/share/hx/spool/`)
- DB: `$XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/hx.db` (daemon ingests spool → DB)
- Pause flag: `$XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/.paused`
- Daemon PID: `$XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/hxd.pid`

Override with `HX_SPOOL_DIR`, `HX_DB_PATH`, `HX_BLOB_DIR` if needed.

## Config

Optional config at `~/.config/hx/config.yaml` (or `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/hx/config.yaml`):

```yaml
# Paths (defaults use $XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/...)
# spool_dir: $XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/spool
# blob_dir: $XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/blobs
# db_path: $XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/hx.db

retention_events_months: 12
retention_blobs_days: 90
blob_disk_cap_gb: 2.0

# Ollama (M5) - optional semantic search
# ollama_enabled: true
# ollama_base_url: http://localhost:11434
# ollama_embed_model: nomic-embed-text
# ollama_chat_model: llama3.2
```

Copy `config/config.yaml.example` and edit. Env vars `HX_SPOOL_DIR`, `HX_BLOB_DIR`, `HX_DB_PATH` override config.

## History import

Import existing shell history (zsh extended, bash timestamped, or plain):

```bash
hx import --file ~/.zsh_history
hx import --file ~/.bash_history --shell bash
hx import --file history.txt --host my-laptop
```

Re-importing the same file is idempotent (duplicates skipped). Imported events appear in `hx find` and `hx last`.

## Artifacts (hx attach, hx query)

- **Attach a log:** `hx attach --file build.log` (links to last session by default)
- **Query by file:** `hx query --file error.log` — finds artifacts with same skeleton hash, returns related sessions

## Semantic search (hx query, optional Ollama)

Ask natural-language questions over your command history:

```bash
hx query "how did I fix the make build"
hx query "pytest test run" --no-llm
```

- **With Ollama:** Uses embeddings for semantic re-ranking and an LLM to summarize evidence. Requires [Ollama](https://ollama.com/) running with `nomic-embed-text` and `llama3.2` (or configured models).
- **Without Ollama / --no-llm:** Uses FTS only; always returns ranked evidence.

Config in `~/.config/hx/config.yaml`:

```yaml
ollama_enabled: true
ollama_base_url: http://localhost:11434
ollama_embed_model: nomic-embed-text
ollama_chat_model: llama3.2
```

Commit message:

feat(M6): retention pruning, pin, forget, export
- Migration: sessions.pinned column (exempt from retention)
- hx pin --session SID | --last
- internal/retention: PruneEvents (12mo), PruneBlobs (90d), ForgetSince
- hxd: run retention pruning every 10 min
- hx forget --since 15m|1h|24h|7d
- hx export [--session SID|--last] [--redacted]
- internal/export: markdown evidence packet with redaction
- Docs: README, INSTALL, PROGRESS, PLAN updated

Made-with: Cursor

INSTALL.md, after:

# hx Install Guide

## Prerequisites

- Go 1.21+
- zsh

## Build

```bash
make build
# Builds with sqlite_fts5 tag for hx find. If FTS5 fails, remove -tags sqlite_fts5 from hx and hxd in Makefile.
```

## Install (optional)

```bash
make install
# Copies bin/hx, bin/hx-emit, bin/hxd to ~/.local/bin
```

Ensure `~/.local/bin` is on your PATH.

## Daemon (hxd)

The daemon ingests spool events into SQLite. Start it manually or via your session manager:

```bash
hxd &
# or: nohup hxd &
```

`hx status` shows daemon health (running / not running) and DB path. `hx dump` prints the last 20 ingested events (no sqlite3 CLI needed).

## Search and sessions

- **hx find \<text\>** — full-text search over command history (FTS5). Returns matching events with session, seq, exit code, cwd.
- **hx last** — last session summary; highlights failures (exit ≠ 0) with 1–2 commands before/after.

## Enable capture (zsh)

Add to `.zshrc`:

```bash
# hx terminal capture
source /path/to/History_eXtended/src/hooks/hx.zsh
```

Or, if you installed via `make install` and the repo is at `~/projects/History_eXtended`:

```bash
source ~/projects/History_eXtended/src/hooks/hx.zsh
```

**Important:** `hx-emit` must be on PATH when the hooks run. If you used `make install`, add `~/.local/bin` to PATH before sourcing the hook (e.g. in `.zshrc`):

```bash
export PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"
source ~/projects/History_eXtended/src/hooks/hx.zsh
```

## Verify

1. Open a new zsh shell (or `source ~/.zshrc`).
2. Run a few commands: `echo hi`, `pwd`, `false`.
3. Check status: `hx status`
4. Inspect spool: `tail ~/.local/share/hx/spool/events.jsonl` or `hx dump` (queries DB, no sqlite3 needed)

You should see `pre` and `post` events for each command.

## Pause / Resume

- `hx pause` — stop capturing (creates `~/.local/share/hx/.paused`)
- `hx resume` — resume capturing

## Data locations

- Spool: `$XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/spool/events.jsonl` (default: `~/.local/share/hx/spool/`)
- DB: `$XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/hx.db` (daemon ingests spool → DB)
- Pause flag: `$XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/.paused`
- Daemon PID: `$XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/hxd.pid`

Override with `HX_SPOOL_DIR`, `HX_DB_PATH`, `HX_BLOB_DIR` if needed.

## Config

Optional config at `~/.config/hx/config.yaml` (or `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/hx/config.yaml`):

```yaml
# Paths (defaults use $XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/...)
# spool_dir: $XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/spool
# blob_dir: $XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/blobs
# db_path: $XDG_DATA_HOME/hx/hx.db

retention_events_months: 12
retention_blobs_days: 90
blob_disk_cap_gb: 2.0

# Ollama (M5) - optional semantic search
# ollama_enabled: true
# ollama_base_url: http://localhost:11434
# ollama_embed_model: nomic-embed-text
# ollama_chat_model: llama3.2
```

Copy `config/config.yaml.example` and edit. Env vars `HX_SPOOL_DIR`, `HX_BLOB_DIR`, `HX_DB_PATH` override config.

## History import

Import existing shell history (zsh extended, bash timestamped, or plain):

```bash
hx import --file ~/.zsh_history
hx import --file ~/.bash_history --shell bash
hx import --file history.txt --host my-laptop
```

Re-importing the same file is idempotent (duplicates skipped). Imported events appear in `hx find` and `hx last`.

## Retention and privacy (M6)

- **Pin session:** `hx pin --last` or `hx pin --session <SID>` — exempt from retention pruning
- **Forget window:** `hx forget --since 15m` (or 1h, 24h, 7d) — hard-delete events in that window
- **Export:** `hx export --last --redacted` — markdown evidence packet; `--redacted` sanitizes timestamps and tokens

The daemon (hxd) runs retention pruning every 10 minutes: events older than 12 months (configurable) and blobs older than 90 days. Pinned sessions are never pruned.

## Artifacts (hx attach, hx query)

- **Attach a log:** `hx attach --file build.log` (links to last session by default)
- **Query by file:** `hx query --file error.log` — finds artifacts with same skeleton hash, returns related sessions

## Semantic search (hx query, optional Ollama)

Ask natural-language questions over your command history:

```bash
hx query "how did I fix the make build"
hx query "pytest test run" --no-llm
```

- **With Ollama:** Uses embeddings for semantic re-ranking and an LLM to summarize evidence. Requires [Ollama](https://ollama.com/) running with `nomic-embed-text` and `llama3.2` (or configured models).
- **Without Ollama / --no-llm:** Uses FTS only; always returns ranked evidence.

Config in `~/.config/hx/config.yaml`:

```yaml
ollama_enabled: true
ollama_base_url: http://localhost:11434
ollama_embed_model: nomic-embed-text
ollama_chat_model: llama3.2
```
